NASA Data Science &
Astronomy Research
Internship
Summer 2026
Exoplanet data analysis • NASA missions • Scientific writing




Dr. Peter Plavchan
George Mason University


landolt.gmu.edu | @PlavchanPeter
nasa.schar.program@gmail.com
 Assignments to date

     Older:
     Telescope Observing
     Review NASA mission study proposals, study reports, and mission proposals
     Run the AU Mic jupyter notebook; Experiment with the code
     Pick a TOI from the Exoplanet Archive
     Retrieve a new TESS candidate light curve from MAST and generate a plot
     Change time and flux ranges of the plot; Post plot to Discord Channel

     Recent:
     Download GMU telescope TOI follow-up data sets, analyze and produce light curves.
     Post progress and challenges to discord
     Research your TOI on the NASA Exoplanet Archive
     Prepare presentation poster for symposium
     Future:
     Write your paper
     Optional:
     Pick a JWST transit observation (spreadsheet of options forthcoming)
     Analyze following the Jupyter notebook tutorial
     Write a separate paper on this observation (examples forthcoming)

Schar School of Policy and Government                                                    2
 Acccess to all data:

     Go to spreadsheet shared with you via email and Discord. Please enter your name in Column N, first and last
     initial. This is NOT first come, first serve, so don't rush. Multiple people can analyze the same data set,
     together as a team of up to 3, or independently. Put a ";" (semi-colon) between names. If a group, indicate
     this as well with some explanation.

     To assist in picking a data set, look at it first. research the TOI on the NASA Exoplanet archive. google the
     target. Ask AI. Pay particular attention to some of our team's old notes in column S.

     2022 data: https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/148QIVQoSZVHBrvJmaSV5IGIpspOYdsGK?usp=sharing
     2023 data: https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1baHyEpGMZzcPr6OnAspDXhS9Ho_67IUq?usp=sharing
     2024 data: https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1HZyoRaUZarzPpO8kOLwQkd90M7mpeHRU?usp=sharing
     2025 data: https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1uI4uYjjzxeS5g7ewToQfrW48p_34Z3HA?usp=sharing

     Use the date from the above spreadsheet, and go into that folder. You should find a subfolder with the same
     name as the TOI number. Download that folder and its data. Extract the multiple 2GB zip files, and merge the
     file contents.

Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                2
 What about JWST data

     • Use the MAST archive to retrieve
     • Attempt only after receiving approval for your light curve
       analysis via Discord for the campus telescope TESS follow-
       up data.
     • Why? JWST data is another level deeper in complexity.
     • What the video sent previously for how to access the data,
       how to access code to process and analye JWST data, … or
       … write your own! It is better to be a tool creator than solely a
       tool user.
     • Use the python jupyter notebook tutorials available on the
       STScI github account.
Schar School of Policy and Government                                      2
 Schedule


     June 13, 20, 27, July 11– live lectures
     June 25, July 1, July 4 , 15– asynchronous
     lectures
     July 11, 18, 25 – live office hours
     July 31st – Symposium tours
     August 1st – Symposium day

Schar School of Policy and Government             2
Topics for Our Program

    Introductions                                   Working with data, part 2: AstroImageJ

    Logistics                                       Making a Measurement: Science Methods
                                                    and Inference
    How a NASA Mission Happens                      Science Writing

    Working with data, part 1: Jupyter notebooks    Space Revolution and Space Policy
    and FITS files
    Telescopes on the Ground and in Space           Working with data, part 3: JWST
    (part 2)
    The NASA TESS mission and Transiting            Bonus? Mission Engineering
    Exoplanets




NASA Data Science & Astronomy Research Internship
 Draft Symposium Schedule


          • 9-9:30: Checkin, set up posters (digital
            and print)
          • 9:30-11:30: Talks
          • 11:30-1:00: Poster viewing & lunch
          • 1:00-3:00 – Research Lab Tours


Schar School of Policy and Government                  3
 Final homework Assignments: the poster

          • Poster – 48x36” max – 40x30” template:
            https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/awofmzrkfdj083r16oq0w/ScharScholars_N
            AME_PosterTemplate.pptx?rlkey=ljfyftt7r15vm206hewolegoq&st=y2uxh07s
            &dl=1 (password: Schar2026!)
          • We will send out a survey to learn your preference for a poster or a talk; and
            talk selection depends on analysis posted to discord.
          • How to make a prize winning poster:
            https://sites.psu.edu/astrowright/2013/09/17/make-award-winning-
            posters/




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                        3
 Final homework Assignments: the talk

          • PPT or Google Slides (keynote ok, but not preferred)
          • 1 minute per slide, at most 2 slides per minute
          • Practice your talks in advance à helps with flow, comfort level and timing (5
            minutes max)
          • Try to avoid large blocks of text. à put this in notes or a script
          • Focus figures (including images and screen grabs), tables or bulleted lists
          • Slides should follow the sections of the paper, with at most 2-3 slides per
            section, ideally 1-2.
                     • Intro, Observations, Data Reduction, Aperture Photometry, Light Curve Detrending,
                       Result, Discussion, Conclusions and Future work, Acknowledgments




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                      3
 Final homework Assignments: the paper

          • Due August 29th
          • Discord will remain open for Q&A, check-ins, assistance, technical support; I
            will not be responsive to email. I will not have time to review writing in
            general.
          • Lean into each other on Discord:
                     • Swap drafts!
                     • Compare data reduction approaches;
                     • Use the chat and audio channels on Discord
                     • Get a study group together! Self-organize by high school or geographic region. You can
                       achieve more together than working in isolation.
                     • Post light curves to discord, and light curve settings, post xls target light curve files, and
                       .plotcfg files to reproduce a plot.
                     • My team will assist you as much as we can through when our semester starts (August
                       25th)


Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                   3
 Final homework Assignments: the paper

          Please send as a PDF to execed@gmu.edu and nasa.schar.program@gmail.com
          Use Google Docs, Word, or Overleaf if you go the latex route; you can send
          these as well.
          Your papers may be lightly edited and will be posted as a student journal from
          George Mason University. We will provide this link to you in the fall to use in
          your resumes and college applications.




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                       3
Final homework Assignments: the paper

         Example papers from last year: https://science.gmu.edu/academics/departments-units/physics-and-astronomy-
         department/observatory/schar-astro-scholars
         Here are some professional examples on the validation of a transiting exoplanet with ground-based follow-up:
                       This is a good example from a high school student:
                                 https://emerginginvestigators.org/articles/ground-based-follow-up-observations-of-tess-exoplanet-
                                 candidates/pdf
                       https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.14344
                       https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/516/3/4432/6692879
                       https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.08179
                       https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.05709
                       https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.08242
                       https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.07328
                       This links to even more TESS follow-up papers I have been on:
                       https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/search/q=%20author%3A%22Plavchan%22%20title%3A%22TOI%22&sort=date%2
                       0desc%2C%20bibcode%20desc&p_=0
                       Note: DO NOT pay for any paper access. If you want access to a particular paper, often George Mason has
                       institutional access. Send me a link and I can see if I can provide you a free copy. When looking for papers via
                       NASA ADS, look for the free “arXiv” preprint link.
         Example websites and papers for reference:
                       https://tess.mit.edu/followup/
                       https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.12538
                       https://asd.gsfc.nasa.gov/archive/tess/ground_based_followup.html
Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                                     3
 Final homework Assignments: the paper

Science goals of paper:
       Verify that the transit occurs on the TESS object of interest (you need a finder chart to know which is
       your target - https://astro.swarthmore.edu/transits/finding_charts.cgi , at the time predicted, with the
       depth (brightness change) expected, and with the duration expected.
       If not, it could be poor timing knowledge (the timing uncertainty matters), or a false-positive for a variety of
       reasons.
       We provided the expected start and stop times of transit for you, but once you have light curves for us to
       look at, post them to discord.
       We can look up more details about the transit, such as the timing uncertainty, and notes from the TESS
       team on what other observations have revealed. Only I and Kevin have access to this TESS team
       information to share. Only when you have a light curve can we move on to interpretation and provide you
       this information.
       If there is no detectable transit, it could be that the signal was too small given the noise in our lightcurve to
       discern it.
       It could also be that there is a nearby star that is an eclipsing binary, and AstroImageJ has a tool called the
       nearby eclipsing binary (NEB) check that we can help you run and learn to interpret.
Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                3
 Final homework Assignments: the paper

          • Most importantly, try your best. Get as far as you can in the process, and write up what you are
            able to complete. If you fall short of our goals, conclude with a future work section outlining the
            remaining work to be completed in the future (by you or someone else)
          • This is a very challenging assignment, one that usually not all college undergraduate students can
            complete successfully as part of a course.
          • You will struggle – you’ve never done this before.
          • You have very little help, mentorship and guidance. There is no known “right answer” unlike in a
            math class. We don’t know what the outcome will be.
          • Each night’s data outcome can be very different!
                     •      Many may be plagued by clouds, data gaps, and result in an inconclusive outcome.
                     •      Many may result in marginal or noisy detections
                     •      Some transits may be incomplete (partial)
                     •      Some will be false positives.
                     •      Only a few will result in clear, on target detections
                     •      Be careful with the language you use in your papers – try to be precise
          • The outcome may be more work that will have to be deferred to the future.
          • You may answer one question but leave or create several more unanswered.
          • This… is research.
Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                             3
Topics for Our Program

    Introductions                                   Working with data, part 2: AstroImageJ

    Logistics                                       Making a Measurement: Science Methods
                                                    and Inference
    How a NASA Mission Happens                      Science Writing

    Working with data, part 1: Jupyter notebooks    Space Revolution and Space Policy
    and FITS files
    Telescopes on the Ground and in Space           Working with data, part 3: JWST
    (part 2)
    The NASA TESS mission and Transiting            Bonus? Mission Engineering
    Exoplanets




NASA Data Science & Astronomy Research Internship
 Basic Statistics

                                        Mean:
                                             “Average value” = 1.63




                                        Median: The individual value
                                        from the collection such that 1/2
                                                                                                        Mean
                                                                                           Median
                                        the observations are less and
                                        1/2 are greater = 1.5
                                                                            Mode
                                        Median is often useful because
                                        it is less affected by a single
                                        outlier than the mean

                                         Mode:The most frequently
                                        occurring value in the              16 Values: 1.3, 1.3, 1.3, 1.3, 1.35, 1.35, 1.4,
                                        collection = 1.3                    1.5, 1.5, 1.55, 1.55, 1.55, 1.6, 1.65, 1.65, 4.2




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                          3
 How measurements are distributed

     Most of what we know is derived by making measurements

     A priori, when we make a set of measurements, we may know and expect what
     type of distribution of values of the measurements that we will get (more on this
     later).

     However, we may not know the distributions “central value” (for example,
     mean), nor it’s size or scale.

     Quantifying this distribution of measurements is known as quantifying
     uncertainty or “errors”.


Schar School of Policy and Government                                                    4
 The idea of error

     It is never possible to measure anything exactly (eventually Heisenberg's uncertainty principle
     would bite you!).

     So when you measure something, you have to say how precisely you have measured it -> This is
     the scale of the distribution of measurements.

     Example:
     Planck’s constant h is known to approximately 1.5 parts in 10^8, or 6.626070040(81)×10−34 J-s,
     e.g. 6.626070040 +/- 0.000000081 ×10−34 J-s

     Suppose you derive an experiment to measure Planck’s constant. You can’t just take their value
     and error and use as their own. The above is the work of other scientists’ experiments. Your
     experiment will have it’s own value and associated error.


Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                  5
 The idea of error

     Errors are also not 'blunders' or experimental mishaps which
     can be fixed.

     If a telescope is bumped during an exposure resulting in two
     sets of stars, the image is simply deleted and redone. If it's not
     caught at the time, then this datum is discarded.

     Errors occur for all measurements. It is impossible to know
     exactly how far off a measurement is. Otherwise, the
     measurements would just be 'adjusted' (fudge-factor) to the
     proper value. But this is not possible nor good science.
Schar School of Policy and Government                                     6
 The classification of error


     Errors occur in two types: systematic and random.

     Systematic errors are errors which shift all
     measurements in the same way. Things like
     improper equipment calibration, thicker atmosphere
     than anticipated, etc.

     An example is a ruler with the wrong length.
Schar School of Policy and Government                     7
 The classification of error

     Random errors displace measurements in an arbitrary
     direction (they scatter measurements about a value). They
     cannot be eliminated, but usually can be reduced (by
     making multiple measurements).

     For example, each measurement of a star includes random
     fluctuations caused by seeing, detector noise, random sky
     noise, etc.

     OK, so how do we quantify errors?
Schar School of Policy and Government                            8
 How sets of events or measurements are distributed

   Often with data we have a large number of
   “events”. For most experiments, the
   outcome is a continuous distribution of
   possible values. In this case, the distribution
   of results approaches a smooth curve as the
   number of measurements approaches
   infinity.

   y = a e^[ -(x-x0)2 / (2 σ2)]

   Other continuous examples: uniform
   random distribution; lognormal distribution,
   student t-distribution, etc…                 Gaussian Distribution: x0 = mean, 𝜎 = standard deviation


Schar School of Policy and Government                                                               9
 Gaussian Distribution - FWHM


   y = a e^[ -(x-x0)2 / (2 σ2)]

                                        a
   Full width at half maximum:




                                        x0




Schar School of Policy and Government        10
 Binomial Distribution

            • Where there are exactly 2 mutually exclusive outcomes
              – success or failure.
            • The probability of observing m successes in n
              observations
                                                                          For a particular n




            • p is probability of success
            in a single observation
                                                         p
            Approaches Gaussian for
            large n and m, but <0 excluded


                                                                      m successes
Schar School of Policy and Government                                                          11
   Poisson Distribution – when the outcome is a discrete integer and positive definite



The limit of the binomial distribution
for rare events and a large number of
trials.
The “counting rate” distribution. The
value can never be less than zero. For
example the number of photons that
arrive in a time interval can be 0, 1, 2,
… but can never be less than 0                                     p
  Pr(k events given lambda) =



                                          Similar to Gaussian for large
                                          lambda, but still excludes k<0   k
  Schar School of Policy and Government   and only integer measurements                  12
 Estimating How Good the Data Are


                                        (Simple) deviation: (Note that   is how we
                                          represent the mean)


                                        Mean deviation: The N-1 represents the loss
                                         of one degree of freedom - with only 1 data
                                         point the mean deviation is meaningless


Schar School of Policy and Government                                                  13
 Estimating How Good the Data Are

   Variance: (true*) Standard deviation, root mean square
   deviation (rms or sigma) which is the better estimator for
   random errors than the mean deviation




   * This is called the “true” because we are using the values
   to determine the mean. Thus, we lose one “degree of
   freedom” when we calculate the mean from the data and
   hence the N-1. If the mean is known a priori, then N-1 -> N

Schar School of Policy and Government                            14
 Estimating how Good your Data Are Cont.

You can use the equation of the normal distribution to
determine the fraction of data points within 1s, 2 s, 3
s, etc.

         •68% of points are within 1s
         •95% of points are within 2s
         •99.7% of points are within 3s (3/1000 are not)
         •99.994% … 4 s

         Works well if your distribution is Gaussian, fails
         horribly if it is not.

         These are sometimes called “confidence intervals”.
         E.g., with 95% confidence we can say the mean lies
         within 2-sigma of this value. But all distributions
         and not just Gaussians have confidence intervals.

Schar School of Policy and Government                          15
 Estimating how Good your Data Are Cont.

You can use the equation of the normal distribution to
determine the fraction of data points within 1s, 2 s, 3
s, etc.

         •68% of points are within 1s
         •95% of points are within 2s
         •99.7% of points are within 3s (3/1000 are not)
         •99.994% … 4 s

         Works well if your distribution is Gaussian, fails
         horribly if it is not.

         Example: when the ”highly improbable” events are
         more probable than you estimated (stock market
         crash). Sometimes called the “long tail”. Student
         t-distribution does a better job of capturing outliers
         than a Gaussian.
Schar School of Policy and Government                             16
 Estimating how Good your Data Are Cont.


   There are many
   different ways to
   summarize and
   visualize your
   measurements:




Schar School of Policy and Government      17
 Error Propagation

                                    • Let’s say you’ve measured multiple quantities and
                                      now you want to combine them in some
                                      mathematical formula.

                                    • For example, I’ve measured the time of one
                                      transit of an exoplanet to be t1+/- s1 and I’ve
                                      measured the next transit to occur at t2 +/- s2.

                                    • What can I say the period of the orbiting
                                      exoplanet to be?

Schar School of Policy and Government                                                     18
 Error Propagation

                                    • Let’s say you’ve measured multiple quantities and
                                      now you want to combine them in some
                                      mathematical formula.

                                    • For example, I’ve measured the time of one
                                      transit of an exoplanet to be t1+/- s1 and I’ve
                                      measured the next transit to occur at t2 +/- s2.

                                    • P = t2 – t1. But what about sP?


Schar School of Policy and Government                                                     18
 Error Propagation


                                    As another example. What if I’ve measured Planck’s constant
                                    to be:

                                    6.626070040 +/- 0.000000081 ×10−34 J-s

                                    And the frequency of a photon to be 10.000+/-0.001 GHz

                                    What is the energy of the photon (E=hf)?
                                    What about the value for sE?


Schar School of Policy and Government                                                             20
 Error Propagation – start with a simple linear function




                                        f=P
                                        x1 = t2
                                        a1 =1
                                        x2 =t1
                                        a2 = -1


        Given individual uncertainties on measurements xi, which we
        denote σi, what is the total uncertainty on f?

Schar School of Policy and Government                                 21
 Error Propagation:

     In reality, even for a simple linear function, errors can be correlated between variables:




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                             22
 Error Propagation:

     In reality, even for a simple linear function, errors can be correlated between variables:
                                                              Correlated Uncertainties
                                                              (Can be systematic or random)




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                             22
 Error Propagation:

     In reality, even for a simple linear function, errors can be correlated between variables:




                                            0
                                        0




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                             22
 Error Propagation:




Schar School of Policy and Government   22
 Error Propagation:




       Key result: increase number of measurements
       and decrease uncertainty from random errors by sqrt(n):

       For an average, ai = 1/n and thus: σf = σ/sqrt(n)
Schar School of Policy and Government                            22
 Full Error Propagation Formula for Non-Linear Functions – linearize them as an approximation!




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                            23
 Propagation of Errors

     In these equations a and b are constants, u and v are variables




Schar School of Policy and Government                                  24
 Propagation of Errors

     In these equations a and b are constants, u and v are variables




Schar School of Policy and Government                                  24
 What does this mean?

     The area of a rectangle is given by:
     A = LW
     You have the following measurements:
     L=22.1±0.1cm W=7.3 ±0.2cm
     What is the uncertainty in A?




Schar School of Policy and Government       26
 Signal-to-Noise Ratio

     Now that we understand errors/uncertainties, we can discuss a measure of the significance of
     an observational result.
     Signal is the number of “detections.” For our purposes, at least to begin, signal will generally be
     the number of photons detected from our source.
     Noise in this first case is “everything else” including photons from the “sky,” signal from the
     electronics, and random fluctuations due to photon detection being a poisson process.
     In the simple case where there is no electronic or sky noise:




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                      27
 Signal-to-Noise Cont.


                                        Signal        Noise    S/N
                                        10            3.16     3.16
                                        100 (102)     10.00    10.00
                                        1000 (103)    31.62    31.62
                                        10000 (104)   100.00   100.00
                                        100000 (105) 316.23    316.23



     Note: if signal increases linearly with time observing time must be increased by
     a factor of 100 for S/N to increase by a factor of 10. This is what we mean when
     we say ”The SNR goes as the square root of the integration time.”
Schar School of Policy and Government                                                   28
