NASA Data Science &
Astronomy Research
Internship
Summer 2026
Exoplanet data analysis • NASA missions • Scientific writing




Dr. Peter Plavchan
George Mason University


landolt.gmu.edu | @PlavchanPeter
nasa.schar.program@gmail.com
Topics for Our Program

    Introductions                                   Working with data, part 2: AstroImageJ

    Logistics                                       Making a Measurement: Science Methods
                                                    and Inference
    How a NASA Mission Happens                      Science Writing

    Working with data, part 1: Jupyter notebooks    Space Revolution and Space Policy
    and FITS files
    Telescopes on the Ground and in Space           Working with data, part 3: JWST
    (part 2)
    The NASA TESS mission and Transiting            Bonus? Mission Engineering
    Exoplanets




NASA Data Science & Astronomy Research Internship
 Basic Statistics

                                        Mean:
                                             “Average value” = 1.63




                                        Median: The individual value
                                        from the collection such that 1/2
                                                                                                        Mean
                                                                                           Median
                                        the observations are less and
                                        1/2 are greater = 1.5
                                                                            Mode
                                        Median is often useful because
                                        it is less affected by a single
                                        outlier than the mean

                                         Mode:The most frequently
                                        occurring value in the              16 Values: 1.3, 1.3, 1.3, 1.3, 1.35, 1.35, 1.4,
                                        collection = 1.3                    1.5, 1.5, 1.55, 1.55, 1.55, 1.6, 1.65, 1.65, 4.2




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                          3
 How measurements are distributed

     Most of what we know is derived by making measurements

     A priori, when we make a set of measurements, we may know and expect what
     type of distribution of values of the measurements that we will get (more on this
     later).

     However, we may not know the distributions “central value” (for example,
     mean), nor it’s size or scale.

     Quantifying this distribution of measurements is known as quantifying
     uncertainty or “errors”.


Schar School of Policy and Government                                                    4
 The idea of error

     It is never possible to measure anything exactly (eventually Heisenberg's uncertainty principle
     would bite you!).

     So when you measure something, you have to say how precisely you have measured it -> This is
     the scale of the distribution of measurements.

     Example:
     Planck’s constant h is known to approximately 1.5 parts in 10^8, or 6.626070040(81)×10−34 J-s,
     e.g. 6.626070040 +/- 0.000000081 ×10−34 J-s

     Suppose you derive an experiment to measure Planck’s constant. You can’t just take their value
     and error and use as their own. The above is the work of other scientists’ experiments. Your
     experiment will have it’s own value and associated error.


Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                  5
 The idea of error

     Errors are also not 'blunders' or experimental mishaps which
     can be fixed.

     If a telescope is bumped during an exposure resulting in two
     sets of stars, the image is simply deleted and redone. If it's not
     caught at the time, then this datum is discarded.

     Errors occur for all measurements. It is impossible to know
     exactly how far off a measurement is. Otherwise, the
     measurements would just be 'adjusted' (fudge-factor) to the
     proper value. But this is not possible nor good science.
Schar School of Policy and Government                                     6
 The classification of error


     Errors occur in two types: systematic and random.

     Systematic errors are errors which shift all
     measurements in the same way. Things like
     improper equipment calibration, thicker atmosphere
     than anticipated, etc.

     An example is a ruler with the wrong length.
Schar School of Policy and Government                     7
 The classification of error

     Random errors displace measurements in an arbitrary
     direction (they scatter measurements about a value). They
     cannot be eliminated, but usually can be reduced (by
     making multiple measurements).

     For example, each measurement of a star includes random
     fluctuations caused by seeing, detector noise, random sky
     noise, etc.

     OK, so how do we quantify errors?
Schar School of Policy and Government                            8
 How sets of events or measurements are distributed

   Often with data we have a large number of
   “events”. For most experiments, the
   outcome is a continuous distribution of
   possible values. In this case, the distribution
   of results approaches a smooth curve as the
   number of measurements approaches
   infinity.

   y = a e^[ -(x-x0)2 / (2 σ2)]

   Other continuous examples: uniform
   random distribution; lognormal distribution,
   student t-distribution, etc…                 Gaussian Distribution: x0 = mean, 𝜎 = standard deviation


Schar School of Policy and Government                                                               9
 Gaussian Distribution - FWHM


   y = a e^[ -(x-x0)2 / (2 σ2)]

                                        a
   Full width at half maximum:




                                        x0




Schar School of Policy and Government        10
 Binomial Distribution

            • Where there are exactly 2 mutually exclusive outcomes
              – success or failure.
            • The probability of observing m successes in n
              observations
                                                                          For a particular n




            • p is probability of success
            in a single observation
                                                         p
            Approaches Gaussian for
            large n and m, but <0 excluded


                                                                      m successes
Schar School of Policy and Government                                                          11
   Poisson Distribution – when the outcome is a discrete integer and positive definite



The limit of the binomial distribution
for rare events and a large number of
trials.
The “counting rate” distribution. The
value can never be less than zero. For
example the number of photons that
arrive in a time interval can be 0, 1, 2,
… but can never be less than 0                                     p
  Pr(k events given lambda) =



                                          Similar to Gaussian for large
                                          lambda, but still excludes k<0   k
  Schar School of Policy and Government   and only integer measurements                  12
 Estimating How Good the Data Are


                                        (Simple) deviation: (Note that   is how we
                                          represent the mean)


                                        Mean deviation: The N-1 represents the loss
                                         of one degree of freedom - with only 1 data
                                         point the mean deviation is meaningless


Schar School of Policy and Government                                                  13
 Estimating How Good the Data Are

   Variance: (true*) Standard deviation, root mean square
   deviation (rms or sigma) which is the better estimator for
   random errors than the mean deviation




   * This is called the “true” because we are using the values
   to determine the mean. Thus, we lose one “degree of
   freedom” when we calculate the mean from the data and
   hence the N-1. If the mean is known a priori, then N-1 -> N

Schar School of Policy and Government                            14
 Estimating how Good your Data Are Cont.

You can use the equation of the normal distribution to
determine the fraction of data points within 1s, 2 s, 3
s, etc.

         •68% of points are within 1s
         •95% of points are within 2s
         •99.7% of points are within 3s (3/1000 are not)
         •99.994% … 4 s

         Works well if your distribution is Gaussian, fails
         horribly if it is not.

         These are sometimes called “confidence intervals”.
         E.g., with 95% confidence we can say the mean lies
         within 2-sigma of this value. But all distributions
         and not just Gaussians have confidence intervals.

Schar School of Policy and Government                          15
 Estimating how Good your Data Are Cont.

You can use the equation of the normal distribution to
determine the fraction of data points within 1s, 2 s, 3
s, etc.

         •68% of points are within 1s
         •95% of points are within 2s
         •99.7% of points are within 3s (3/1000 are not)
         •99.994% … 4 s

         Works well if your distribution is Gaussian, fails
         horribly if it is not.

         Example: when the ”highly improbable” events are
         more probable than you estimated (stock market
         crash). Sometimes called the “long tail”. Student
         t-distribution does a better job of capturing outliers
         than a Gaussian.
Schar School of Policy and Government                             16
 Estimating how Good your Data Are Cont.


   There are many
   different ways to
   summarize and
   visualize your
   measurements:




Schar School of Policy and Government      17
 Error Propagation

                                    • Let’s say you’ve measured multiple quantities and
                                      now you want to combine them in some
                                      mathematical formula.

                                    • For example, I’ve measured the time of one
                                      transit of an exoplanet to be t1+/- s1 and I’ve
                                      measured the next transit to occur at t2 +/- s2.

                                    • What can I say the period of the orbiting
                                      exoplanet to be?

Schar School of Policy and Government                                                     18
 Error Propagation

                                    • Let’s say you’ve measured multiple quantities and
                                      now you want to combine them in some
                                      mathematical formula.

                                    • For example, I’ve measured the time of one
                                      transit of an exoplanet to be t1+/- s1 and I’ve
                                      measured the next transit to occur at t2 +/- s2.

                                    • P = t2 – t1. But what about sP?


Schar School of Policy and Government                                                     18
 Error Propagation


                                    As another example. What if I’ve measured Planck’s constant
                                    to be:

                                    6.626070040 +/- 0.000000081 ×10−34 J-s

                                    And the frequency of a photon to be 10.000+/-0.001 GHz

                                    What is the energy of the photon (E=hf)?
                                    What about the value for sE?


Schar School of Policy and Government                                                             20
 Error Propagation – start with a simple linear function




                                        f=P
                                        x1 = t2
                                        a1 =1
                                        x2 =t1
                                        a2 = -1


        Given individual uncertainties on measurements xi, which we
        denote σi, what is the total uncertainty on f?

Schar School of Policy and Government                                 21
 Error Propagation:

     In reality, even for a simple linear function, errors can be correlated between variables:




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                             22
 Error Propagation:

     In reality, even for a simple linear function, errors can be correlated between variables:
                                                              Correlated Uncertainties
                                                              (Can be systematic or random)




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                             22
 Error Propagation:

     In reality, even for a simple linear function, errors can be correlated between variables:




                                            0
                                        0




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                             22
 Error Propagation:




Schar School of Policy and Government   22
 Error Propagation:


                                        σP2 = (1)2 σ12+ (-1)2 σ22
                                        σP2 = σ12+ σ22
                                        σP = (σ12+ σ22)1/2



       Key result: increase number of measurements
       and decrease uncertainty from random errors by sqrt(n):

       For an average: f = 1/N Σ xi à ai = 1/N, σi = σ à and thus:
       σf = √N * 1/N * σ = σ/√N
Schar School of Policy and Government                                22
 Full Error Propagation Formula for Non-Linear Functions – linearize them as an approximation!




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                            23
 Propagation of Errors

     In these equations a and b are constants, u and v are variables




Schar School of Policy and Government                                  24
 Propagation of Errors

     In these equations a and b are constants, u and v are variables




Schar School of Policy and Government                                  24
 What does this mean?

     The area of a rectangle is given by:
     A = LW
     You have the following measurements:
     L=22.1±0.1cm W=7.3 ±0.2cm
     What is the uncertainty in A?




Schar School of Policy and Government       26
 Signal-to-Noise Ratio

     Now that we understand errors/uncertainties, we can discuss a measure of the significance of
     an observational result.
     Signal is the number of “detections.” For our purposes, at least to begin, signal will generally be
     the number of photons detected from our source.
     Noise in this first case is “everything else” including photons from the “sky,” signal from the
     electronics, and random fluctuations due to photon detection being a poisson process.
     In the simple case where there is no electronic or sky noise:




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                      27
 Signal-to-Noise Cont.


                                        Signal        Noise    S/N
                                        10            3.16     3.16
                                        100 (102)     10.00    10.00
                                        1000 (103)    31.62    31.62
                                        10000 (104)   100.00   100.00
                                        100000 (105) 316.23    316.23



     Note: if signal increases linearly with time observing time must be increased by
     a factor of 100 for S/N to increase by a factor of 10. This is what we mean when
     we say ”The SNR goes as the square root of the integration time.”
Schar School of Policy and Government                                                   28
 Fitting a model to data


     Beyond determining the mean and
     standard deviation of a set of
     measurements, you can explore how the
     measurement of a quantity depends on
     some parameter


Schar School of Policy and Government        29
 Least squares minimization (includes linear regression)




                                        Data   model

                                  When y is the smallest, then
                                  the line best represents the
                                  data.

                                  You may have used this in a
                                  spreadsheet with the
                                  command slope or linest.
Schar School of Policy and Government                            30
 Least squares minimization (includes linear regression)

                                        A method of determining the characteristic y as a function of x
                                        Equation of a line:
                                              y(x) = a + bx



                                        The method determines the most probable
                                        values of a and b for a series of x and y
                                        values
                                        For simplicity, we assume all of the
                                        uncertainty is in the variable y and that the
                                        uncertainty in all of the y values is the same




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                     30
 Least squares minimization (includes linear regression)
                                    Taylor describes how the best fit values for A and B are determined.
                                    We will skip to the answer for our purposes here:




                                        The errors in the coefficients are given by:




                                    Note that a similar process can be done to find the best fit to an
                                    arbitrary function. This is the process we can “minimizing c2”

Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                      30
 How linear is our data?

                                        We use the coefficient of linear correlation to describe how
                                        linear the data are:




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                  30
 Goodness of fit – going beyond the line to more complex models


   aka, how well does my model describe the data?




Schar School of Policy and Government                             31
 𝝼 is the number of degrees of freedom – typically number of data points minus number of model parameters



   Goodness of fit
   aka, how well does my model describe the data?




                                                                           𝝼 is the number of degrees of
                                                                           freedom – typically number
                                                                           of data points minus number
                                                                           of model parameters



                                                                     Pearson


Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                       32
  More complex model fitting approaches

For analytic equations that are differentiable, there are numerical minimizers:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Numerical_methods_for_ordinary_differential_equations

e.g.:

Newton’s method: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newton%27s_method
Euler’s method

For numerical models with a few model parameters, one can use a “brute force” “grid search” approach, where
every model parameter is tried over a large set of values to find the model that fits the data the best (lowest rms
of data-model).

However, brute force approaches fail horribly for higher number of model parameters (dimensionality of model
space).

 Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                        32
 More complex model fitting approaches


           • Enter the Nelder-Mead simplex algorithm: One method many numerical ones to
             efficiently survey high dimensional model parameter (Hilbert-like) spaces to find best fits:
             https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nelder%E2%80%93Mead_method




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                       32
 More complex model fitting approaches


Nelder-Mead is already out of fashion (but still one of my faves). The minimizer of the decade is the gradient descent
algorithm. It is what permeates ALL of machine learning for neural network node weight back-propagation solutions.

Gradient Descent Algorithm iteratively calculates the next point using gradient at the current position, scales it (by a
learning rate) and subtracts obtained value from the current position (makes a step). It subtracts the value because we
want to minimise the function (to maximise it would be adding).




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                    32
• https://towardsdatascience.co
  m/gradient-descent-algorithm-
  a-deep-dive-cf04e8115f21
• https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
  Gradient_descent
 What if I have two or more models? Which is better, even if identical χ2 values




Schar School of Policy and Government                                              33
 What if I have two or more models? Which is better? Or similarly, what if my assumption (like a Gaussian distribution) is
 wrong? How would I be able to tell?




                                        Cliffhanger…. To be continued.

Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                        34
 CCDs




Schar School of Policy and Government   35
 What is a CCD detector?

     CCD = Charge-Coupled Device

     This is basically the equivalent of a digital camera that we put on the back of our telescope.


     CCDs are the detection device generally used in optical and infrared astronomy, converting (coupling) photons into electrons
     (charges)

     History
     Invented by Boyle and Smith at Bell Labs in 1969. They were intended as memory storage devices before their image detection
     capabilities were found.

     First astronomical use:
     1976 61" at Mt. Lemmon in AZ.
     1977 200" at Mt. Palomar in CA.




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                               36
 Military – Astronomy Connections

     CCDs à spy satellites no longer needed to drop film canisters all over the planet

     https://www.vice.com/en/article/jpzpkg/the-first-spy-satellites-had-to-drop-gigantic-buckets-of-film-back-to-earth


     Hubble Space Telescope à KH-11 spy satellite program à 2 spares donated to NASA in 2012 by NRO à 1 used as Roman
     Space Telescope
     https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/KH-11_KENNEN


     JWST spy satellite heritage à likely, but classified (my guess is instrumentation is different)

     Nice article summarizing:
     https://www.grid.news/story/science/2022/07/13/why-nasas-james-webb-telescope-and-its-galactic-discoveries-may-owe-
     something-to-spy-satellites/




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                      37
 An aside

     Ever wondered about Roswell à watch this physics lecture:

     https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k4ygiQHSNDc

     Incredibly clever use of sound wave transmission physics in the pre-spy satellite era, and well, pre-
     satellite era in general




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                        38
 What is a CCD Detector?
                                                          Image area
                                                                          Metal,ceramic or plastic package
    It has pixels in a grid, square or rectangular in
    a single, large-scale integrated circuit, just like                                                         Connection pins
    a computer chip. The front side consists of a
                                                                                                                  Gold bond wires
    large number of regularly arranged gates and
    channels layered onto a substrate of silicon.                                                                Bond pads



    We want to count the number of photons that
    fall in each pixel to get a measurement of the
                                                                                                              Silicon chip
    brightness of objects in the sky

    Photons get absorbed and free electrons that
    we count

    The image of the sky is recorded as a pattern
    of electric charge “counts”.                                                                             On-chip amplifier



                                                                       Serial register




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                               39
 CCDs

   Rows are parallel to the output register, which is a special
   high-capacity row.




Schar School of Policy and Government                             40
 A single pixel: side view

   MOS gate (a miniature capacitor).




Schar School of Policy and Government   41
 Storing electrons

     A photon is absorbed by the valence band of a silicon semiconductor moving the electron to the conduction band by the
     photoelectric effect


     Photons with wavelengths longer than ~1.2 μm don’t have enough energy to push the electron beyond the band gap


     Impurities in the silicon make the “holes” migrate away from the positive gate when biased with a positive voltage

     The full well capacity is the max. number of electrons that can be stored before electrons and holes recombine


                                                                                       pho
                                                                                        to n                      to n
                                                                                                                 pho

                                                            Conduction Band




                                        Increasing energy
                                                                              1.26eV


                                                            Valence Band



                                                                                               Hole   Electron



Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                        42
 Single pixel – top down view



         Every third electrode is
         connected together making a
         pixel. Wires running down the
         edge of the chip make the
         connection. Channel stops keep
         charge from moving between
         columns.




Schar School of Policy and Government     43
 Readout in time

   Charge is transferred from the column adjacent
   to the serial register. Then the serial register
   "shifts" the charge through the "output node",
   where the charge in each pixel is detected as a
   voltage and converted into a digital number in
   Analog-to-Digital Units or "ADUs". The voltages
   are very low and must be amplified by an on-
   chip amplifier. The A to D converter is usually in
   an external electronics unit, as well as another
   voltage amplifier.

   If one pixel is read at a frequency of 1 MHz, and
   there are 16 megapixels, it takes 16 seconds to
   read out the whole array.


Schar School of Policy and Government                   44
 Analogy – the bucket brigade




Schar School of Policy and Government   45
 CCD advantages: Quantum Efficiency (QE)


                  QE = the fraction or percentage of incident photons that are converted into
                  a measurable output.

                                        Device    Typical QE (%)

                                        Eye       1
                                        Film      1
                                        TV        15
                                        PM Tube   15
                                        CCD       70

                  Spectral Sensitivity = the QE vs. wavelength




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                           46
 CCD advantages: Linearity

   The output response of a CCD varies in direct proportion to
   the intensity of incoming photons. The response is
   extremely linear over most of the output range.




Schar School of Policy and Government                            47
 CCDs – Put it all together

     What information do you get when you take a CCD image?

     (The CCD is placed at the focal plane of the telescope)




Schar School of Policy and Government                          48
 A CCD image of stars.



                                        Stars

                                        Sky

                                        Flat field

                                        Dark Current

                                        Bias level


Schar School of Policy and Government                  49
 The image obtained from the CCD is like several layers of information:

     1. The base is the noise you get when you run electricity through an amplifier. This is called the bias level.
     You get this regardless of how long the exposure time is. Even an image of 0 length has this component.

     2. The 'hum' of the electronics. This is called dark current. This accumulates with time. It is a constant rate
     (counts/second) but the longer you expose, the more you get. To account for this, we take images without
     opening the shutter.




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                  50
 The CCD is like several layers of information:

     3) Pixel-to-pixel sensitivity variations. Some CCD pixels will accumulate counts (light) easier than others.
     This could be caused by a property of the pixel or because there is a speck of dust covering it. To correct
     this, we take 'flat' images, which are pictures of nothing (a blank screen that is not specular like a mirror).




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                  51
 The CCD is like several layers of information:

     4) Sky: Whenever you take an image, there is always stray light that makes its way into your image. Just like
     starlight, it contributes to your signal. However, unlike starlight, it should be evenly spread across your
     image. Therefore, if we examine pixels that do not have objects (stars, galaxies), we can determine how
     much stray light is in our image.




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                52
 Brief aside – difference between CMOS and CCDs

     CMOS sensors are like the parallel version of CCDs.

     Each pixel is addressable and can be read out in parallel with its
     own amplifier built in.

     Rather than the “bucket brigade” of CCDs, all the buckets are
     counted simultaneously.

      Thus it can support much faster readout times.


     It used to be that CMOS sensors were inferior and noisier than
     CCDs. That is no longer the case.


     Otherwise they are very similar, and you’re more likely to find
     CMOS sensors today than 20 years ago in digital cameras.

Schar School of Policy and Government                                     52
 Image Processing Basics




Schar School of Policy and Government   53
 Images to collect for scientific observations

     Option 1: (preferred)
     10 science images with exposure time ts, for each filter
     10 flatfield images with exposure time tf (tf <> ts), for each filter
     10 dark images with exposure time td = ts
     10 dark images with exposure td = tf, for each filter if flatfield
     exposure times for each filter are different
     Preferred both because the detector noise is often not simple linear
     scaling, and because it makes the reduction process easier/faster



Schar School of Policy and Government                                        54
 Put it all together… with option 1 in words

     1) Median combine 10 darks, flats and (optionally) science images
            - Purpose: cosmic ray rejection and reducing noise by factor of ~3
     2) Dark subtracted flatfield = median-combined flatfield – median combined dark with same exposure time as flat
            - Purpose: remove the electronic detector signal to isolate the electrons generated by photons
     3) Reduced/normalized flatfield = dark subtracted flatfield / median value of illuminated portion of dark subtracted
     flatfield
            - Purpose: turn the flatfield image into a pixel correction image of what fraction (percentage) of light is reported by
     each pixel. Typical pixel value will now be close to 1. This ”normalization” gets rid of the variation in counts for flatfields
     (e.g. if I collected two sets of flats with 10,000 counts and 20,000 counts, both will now have values ~1)

     4) Dark subtracted science image = median-combined science image – median combined dark with same exposure as
     science image.
          - Purpose: remove the electronic detector signal to isolate the electrons generated by photons from the
     sky/targets

     5) Reduced science image = dark subtracted science image / reduced flatfield
          - Purpose: remove the variation in individualize pixels so that pixels that behave differently report the same
     number of counts for the same number of photons (now not an integer anymore)

     6) Repeat #3-5 for each filter science observations are collected in.

Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                                  55
 In math (full option 1 equation)

     Reduced science image = {raw science image –dark image} /
     {reduced flat image/median(reduced flat image)}

     Using the dark images with ts=td

     Where:
     Reduced flat image = {raw flat image –dark image}

     Using the dark images with tf=td




Schar School of Policy and Government                            56
 What about option 2?

     Option 2: (not preferred)
     1.   10 science images with exposure time ts, for each filter
     2.   10 flatfield images with exposure time tf (tf <> ts), for each filter
     3.   10 bias images with exposure time tb = 0, the minimum exposure time
     4.   10 dark images with exposure td>0




Schar School of Policy and Government                                             56
 Option 2 in words:

     1.          Median combine 10 biases, darks, flats and (optionally) science images
                Purpose: cosmic ray rejection and reducing noise by factor of ~3
     2.          Bias subtracted dark image = median-combined dark image – median combined bias image
                Purpose: remove the instantaneous detector signal from the detector response to isolate the detector signal (dark current) that builds linearly with
                time.
     3.          Flat-scaled dark image = median combined bias image + tf/td * bias subtracted dark image
                Purpose: generate an estimated image of the detector signal present in the flat images
     4.          Science-scaled dark image = median combined bias image + ts/td * bias subtracted dark image
                Purpose: generate an estimated image of the detector signal present in the science images
     5.          Dark subtracted flatfield = median-combined flatfield – median combined dark with same simulated exposure time as flat from
                 step 3
                Purpose: remove the electronic detector signal to isolate the electrons generated by photons
     6.          Reduced/normalized flatfield = dark subtracted flatfield / median value of illuminated portion of dark subtracted flatfield
                Purpose: turn the flatfield image into a pixel correction image of what fraction (percentage) of light is reported by each pixel. Typical pixel value
                will now be close to 1. This ”normalization” gets rid of the variation in counts for flatfields (e.g. if I collected two sets of flats with 10,000 counts
                and 20,000 counts, both will now have values ~1)
     7.          Dark subtracted science image = median-combined science image – median combined dark with same simulated exposure as
                 science image from step 4.
                Purpose: remove the electronic detector signal to isolate the electrons generated by photons from the sky/targets
     8.          Reduced science image = dark subtracted science image / reduced & normalized flatfield
                Purpose: remove the variation in individual pixels so that pixels that behave differently report the same number of counts for the same number of
                photons (now not an integer anymore)
     9.          Repeat #3-8 for each filter.

Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                                                                       56
 Option 2 in math:

     Reduced science image = {raw science image – [bias image + ts/td*(dark image-bias image)]} /
     {reduced flat image/median(reduced flat image)}
     Where:
     Reduced flat image = [raw flat image – (bias image + tf/td*(dark image-bias image ))]

     When two sets of dark images are available such that ts=td for one set of darks, and tf=td for the other, the above equation
     reduces to option 1.




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                               56
 The full CCD SNR equation:




 Note: Estimate of the 1σ error introduced within the A/D converter: it depends on the actual internal electrical workings of a
 given A/D converter; its value is approximately of 0.289 in the example above, and is generally small enough to ignore.
 Note: Does not capture all of the noise sources in a detector – for example, fringing, bad pixels, cosmic rays, etc.
Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                             56
 Aperture Photometry




Schar School of Policy and Government   57
 How do we measure the brightness of things in an image?


   First let’s start with the simpler case of an unresolved “point
   source” (like a star)




Schar School of Policy and Government                                58
 How do we measure the brightness of things in an image?


   Lets zoom in on one of these stars and adjust how it is
   displayed to show more detail of the point spread function:




Schar School of Policy and Government                            58
 How do we measure the brightness of things in an image?


   In the infinite SNR approximation, if we were to plot this
   image in 3D of one of the stars, it might look something like
   this:




Schar School of Policy and Government                              58
 How do we measure the brightness of things in an image?


   But real images of stars are noisy, so they will look more
   something like this:




Schar School of Policy and Government                           58
 How do we measure the brightness of things in an image?


   But real images of stars are noisy, so they will look more
   something like this:


                     From this, how do we figure out how bright this star is?




Schar School of Policy and Government                                           58
 Measuring Stellar Brightness

     - You draw a circle around the star, called an aperture, and add up the counts inside of it. The signal
       outside the circle will be missed.
     - How big do you make the circle? Well, that depends on a number of factors, the most important being
       signal to noise ratio.
     - If you just look at the brightness of the star in a given aperture you will also be including the background
       and its associated noise.
     - Make it too big, and you have too much background noise
     - Make it too small, and you have left out too much signal.




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                 59
 Measuring Stellar Brightness

     - An offset annulus is then used to subtract the background
     - Best if the background determination is local because the background can vary across an image
     - Use the median of pixels in the annulus to remove bad pixels and cosmic rays

     - There are alternatives, including point spread function modeling, which until recently with Bayesian
       analysis did not work as well as aperture photometry.
     - Another alternative involves combinations of individual pixel time-series, which can be used to
       disentangle instrumental and astrophysical effects. This is particularly important for the NASA TESS
       mission data, and Kepler data as well.




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                         59
 Differential Photometry

     The Easiest Magnitudes to Measure (the hard one is absolute)

     - Once you have measured brightness you need to have something with which to compare it.

     - Multiple sources in the same field can be compared directly without measuring the calibrated brightness


     - Varying sources can be tracked without measuring the calibrated brightness as long as there is a non-
     varying source in the same field

     - Differential photometry avoids the need to calibrate your data with respect to some outside magnitude
     standard




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                            60
 Differential photometry




Schar School of Policy and Government   61
 Differential photometry




Schar School of Policy and Government   62
 Differential photometry




Schar School of Policy and Government   63
 The magnitude system

    Thanks to Hipparchus assigning brightnesses of stars from 1 to 6 with 1 the brightest and 6 the faintest he could
    discern, two millenia ago, and thanks to the fact that our eyes see brightness logarithmically, today astronomers
    use the magnitude system:

    Apparent Magnitude = -2.5 * log ( apparent flux or apparent brightness)
    Absolute Magnitude = -2.5 * log ( absolute flux or absolute brightness)
    Instrumental magnitude = -2.5 * log ( counts from the sensor)

    Counts = 10 ^ ((-instrumental magnitude)/(2.5))

    A star of magnitude 1 is approximately 100 times brighter than a star of magnitude 6.
    A change in magnitude 1 corresponds to a brightness change of ~2.5.




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                   63
 Differential photometry




                                                                  Minst(standard) = measure

                                        Minst(target) = measure




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                         63
 Differential photometry




                                                                  Minst(standard) = measure

                                        Minst(target) = measure   Mtrue(standard)=known



                                             Mtrue(target)=?




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                         63
 Differential photometry




                                                                             Minst(standard) = measure

                                                   Minst(target) = measure   Mtrue(standard)=known



                                                        Mtrue(target)=?


                                        Mtrue(target)-Mtrue(standard) = Minst(target) - Minst(standard)

Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                     63
 Differential photometry



             True brightness of target / known brightness of standard
             =
             Counts of target / counts from standard




Schar School of Policy and Government                                   63
 Differential photometry




                                                                             Minst(standard) = measure

                                                   Minst(target) = measure   Mtrue(standard)=known



                                                        Mtrue(target)=?

                                        Mtrue(target)= Minst(target)
                                                       +1/N x ΣiN (Mtrue(standardi)- Minst(standardi) )
Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                     63
Differential photometry



   Then you repeat this for every image to build up a relative
   light curve.

   We didn’t event talk about non-point source extended
   objects like galaxies. In that case, we can’t do aperture
   photometry, but we can talk about ”surface brightness”
   or brightness per unit area on the sky (aka per pixel)


                                                                 63
 Back to the Cliffhanger




Schar School of Policy and Government   63
 What if I have two or more models? Which is better? Or similarly, what if my assumption (like a Gaussian distribution) is
 wrong? How would I be able to tell?




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                        34
 Sir Thomas Bayes entered the chat.




Schar School of Policy and Government   34
 The statistics revolution in astronomy that started with the NASA Kepler mission

                                                                     The NASA Exoplanet Archive had to make a decision
                                                                     in 2010. The confirmed planets table still exists to
                                                                     this day.

                                                                     At that time, a “confirmed” planet usually meant
                                                                     that it had a mass measured with radial velocities.
                                                                     Today, there’s not really a good definition.

                                                                     But many Kepler candidates were too faint and
                                                                     lightweight for radial velocity confirmation.

                                                                     However, astronomers were statistically ”validating”
                                                                     exoplanets by the hundreds, using new techniques
                                                                     pioneered by Sir Thomas Bayes.

                                                                     The archive decided, under pressure from NASA, to
                                                                     include statistically validated planets in the
                                                                     confirmed planets table. It’s really the “confirmed
                                                                     and validated” table, and remains so today.

                                                                     To this day, the field lacks clear definitions of
                                                                     statistically validated (generally >99%, but what
                                                                     tests are done?), and confirmed (my favorite:
                                                                     detected with two independent techniques)

Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                      34
 Bayes Theorem



           Likelihood principle: All of the information in a sample is contained in
           the likelihood function, a density of probability distribution function.

           The data are modeled by a likelihood function

           Not all statistical paradigms agree with this principle.




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                 34
 Bayes Rule


           Let A and B be two events in the sample space, then:

           P(A | B) = P(AB)/P(B) = P(B|A)P(A)/P(B)

           Note: P(B | A) = P(AB)/P(A) à P(AB) = P(B | A)P(A)

           It is really just about conditional probabilities




Schar School of Policy and Government                             34
 Applying Bayes Rule to models and data:




Schar School of Policy and Government      34
 Another way of writing it:




      The prior distribution allows you to “easily” incorporate your beliefs (assumptions)
      about the parameter(s) of interest.

      Posterior is a distribution on the parameter space given the observed data


Schar School of Policy and Government                                                        34
 A “simple” example:




Schar School of Policy and Government   34
 A “simple” example:




Schar School of Policy and Government   34
 The Bayesian framework



     Classical or “frequentist” methods for inference consider θ (the model parameters)
     to be fixed and unknown.
     à Performance of methods evaluated by repeated sampling
     à Consider all possible data sets

     Bayesian methods consider θ to be random
     à Only considered observed data set as fixed, and prior information (assumptions)




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                     34
 A “simple” example:




Schar School of Policy and Government   34
 Examples of Prior functions and their conjugates
 (inverses of a sort) that are used for the likelihood function




Schar School of Policy and Government                             34
 Uniform Prior




Schar School of Policy and Government   34
  Ok, this is the math, now how do we use it – enter the Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithm, or MCMC




                                 And thus we compute “relative posteriors” to compare models quantitatively given a data set
Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                                          34
  What is the product of MCMC?




Schar School of Policy and Government   34
  What is the product of MCMC?




Schar School of Policy and Government   34
Schar School of Policy and Government   34
  MCMC is an iterative algorithm that evaluates a model given a data set in the model parameter space




Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                   34
  MCMC is an iterative algorithm that evaluates a model given a data set in the model parameter space




                                                                  We then do many of
                                                                  these, and call each
                                                                  one a “chain”. The
                                                                  chains help evaluate
                                                                  convergence. Similar to
                                                                  gradient descent in a
                                                                  sense of parallelism.


Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                   34
  A practical real-world example




        • https://twiecki.io/blog/2015/11/10/mcmc-sampling/




Schar School of Policy and Government                         34
  How do you know when an MCMC finishes?




        Previously, the Gelman-Rubin statistic was useful to evaluate
        the convergence of “chains”, but it relief on the assumption
        (ironic!) that chains were independent, and since the chains
        we initially “mixed”, this wasn’t strictly true.
        More recently (circa 2020), a new statistic called the
        autocorrelation timescale has taken precedence for evaluating
        convergence of MCMC chains:
        https://emcee.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tutorials/autocorr/

Schar School of Policy and Government                                   34
  Each chain in an MCMC looks a little like an amoeba simplex algorithm.




        MCMC explores the (data-model)2 residuals multi-dimensional “surface” (where the dimensions are
        the model parameters).
        Amoeba finds the minimum residuals in that ”valley” of that surface.
        Which is better? Both are computationally intensive, MCMCs even more so than amoeba simplex
        algorithms.
        Amoeba and solvers are in general better for fitting – finding the best fit set of model parameters.
        MCMC is better for understanding the model parameter posterior probability distributions – aka,
        given the data and our model, what is our knowledge of the value and uncertainty distribution for
        each of the model parameters (e.g. what is the shape and size of the rms surface around the
        minimum).
        https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/1538-4365/aab76e/pdf
        https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/1538-4365/aab76e/meta


Schar School of Policy and Government                                                                          34
Schar School of Policy and Government   34
N measurements in transit of fi +/- σi
àN measurements with σ.
Average flux in transit = fit a transit
model in AIJ with a non-fixed depth
Depth = ΔF +/- σ/sqrt(N)
uncertainty on depth measured ~
σ/sqrt(N)

SNR = ? = ΔF* sqrt(N)/σ
MCMC - ExoFast does.

https://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.e
du/cgi-bin/ExoFAST/nph-exofast

https://github.com/jdeast/EXOFASTv2/

Python tools: MCMCs
Pytransit
batman
  The rabbit hole




        Statistical tools will eventually be
        as numerous as the stars in the
        sky J




Schar School of Policy and Government          34
